feat: adding JSON overview and Json configuration docs (#3102)
Kotlin/kotlinx.serialization: docs-website/topics/serialization-json-configuration.md

[//]: # (title: Customize the Json instance)

> The default [`Json`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json/) class enforces Kotlin type safety and only allows values that can be serialized into standard JSON.

Author: good point — I agree 👍

> 

Author: I like it 👍 let's go with that

```kotlin
// Creates a Json instance based on the default configuration, ignoring unknown keys
val customJson = Json {
    ignoreUnknownKeys = true
}

// Use the customJson instance with the same syntax as the default one to encode a string
val jsonString = customJson.encodeToString(user)
println(jsonString)
```

`Json` instances created this way are immutable and thread-safe, which makes them safe to store in a top-level property for reuse.

You can also base a new `Json` instance on an existing one and modify its settings with the [`JsonBuilder`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/) DSL:

```kotlin
// Creates a new instance based on an existing Json
val lenientJson = Json(customJson) {
    isLenient = true
    prettyPrint = true
}
```

> Reusing custom `Json` instances improves performance by allowing them to cache class-specific information.
>
{style="tip"}

The following sections cover the various `Json` class configuration features.

> ## Customize JSON serialization

Reviewer: I feel that the separation between "Customize JSON serialization" and "Customize JSON deserialization" is rather confusing, since a lot of settings, such as `allowSpecialFloatingPointValues`, `explicitNulls`, `allowStructuredMapKeys`, etc. affect both of them. Or we could separate them into "General settings" or smth

Reviewer: As I said, configuration flags sometimes affect both input and output. So we either have to have three categories ("Customize Both", "Customize Serialization output", "Customize deserialization behavior") or invent something else

You can control how Kotlin objects are serialized to JSON by configuring a `Json` instance.
This allows you to format the output, choose whether to include or omit certain values,
and customize how specific types are encoded.

### Pretty printing

By default, `Json` produces a compact, single-line output.

You can add indentations and line breaks for better readability by enabling pretty printing in the output.
To do so, set the [`prettyPrint`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/pretty-print.html) property to `true` in a `Json` instance:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization and JSON handling libraries
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Creates a custom Json format

> val format = Json { prettyPrint = true }

Reviewer: `prettyPrintIndent` setting is missing from current docs, can you please add it here?

Reviewer: It won't be experimental in next release, so you can drop that part. Also maybe use `character(s)` to indicate one can specify as many `\t` as one likes.

import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Configures a Json instance to use a custom class discriminator
val format = Json { classDiscriminator = "#class" }

@Serializable
sealed class Project {
    abstract val name: String
}

// Specifies a custom serial name for the OwnedProject class
@Serializable
@SerialName("owned")
class OwnedProject(override val name: String, val owner: String) : Project()

// Specifies a custom serial name for the SimpleProject class
@Serializable
@SerialName("simple")
class SimpleProject(override val name: String) : Project()

fun main() {
    val simpleProject: Project = SimpleProject("kotlinx.serialization")
    val ownedProject: Project = OwnedProject("kotlinx.coroutines", "kotlin")

    // Serializes SimpleProject with #class: "simple"
    println(format.encodeToString(simpleProject))
    // {"#class":"simple","name":"kotlinx.serialization"}

    // Serializes OwnedProject with #class: "owned"
    println(format.encodeToString(ownedProject))
    // {"#class":"owned","name":"kotlinx.coroutines","owner":"kotlin"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> > [`@JsonClassDiscriminator`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-class-discriminator/) is [Experimental](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained). To opt in, use the `@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)` annotation or the compiler option `-opt-in=kotlinx.serialization.ExperimentalSerializationApi`.

Reviewer: Experimentality warning about `JsonClassDiscriminator` before introducing `JsonClassDiscriminator` itself is strange. This block should be moved one paragraph down.

* [`NONE`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-class-discriminator-mode/-n-o-n-e/): Omits the class discriminator entirely.

Here's an example with the `ClassDiscriminatorMode` property set to `NONE`:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization and JSON handling libraries
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Configures a Json instance to omit the class discriminator from the output
val format = Json { classDiscriminatorMode = ClassDiscriminatorMode.NONE }

@Serializable
sealed class Project {
    abstract val name: String
}

@Serializable
class OwnedProject(override val name: String, val owner: String) : Project()

fun main() {
    val data: Project = OwnedProject("kotlinx.coroutines", "kotlin")
    // Serializes without a discriminator
    println(format.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.coroutines","owner":"kotlin"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> Without the discriminator, the Kotlin serialization library can't deserialize this output back into the appropriate type.
>
{style="note"}

> ## Customize JSON deserialization

Author: removed it 👍

You can use more flexible JSON features or type conversions by creating a custom `Json` instance with the [`Json()`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json.html) builder function:

```kotlin
// Creates a Json instance based on the default configuration, allowing special floating-point values
val customJson = Json {
    allowSpecialFloatingPointValues = true
}

// Use the customJson instance with the same syntax as the default one to encode a string
val jsonString = customJson.encodeToString(Data(Double.NaN))
println(jsonString)
```

`Json` instances created this way are immutable and thread-safe, which makes them safe to store in a top-level property for reuse.

> Reusing custom `Json` instances improves performance by allowing them to cache class-specific information.
>
{style="tip"}

You can also base a new `Json` instance on an existing one and modify its settings using the same builder syntax:

```kotlin
// Creates a new instance based on an existing Json
val lenientJson = Json(customJson) {
    isLenient = true
    prettyPrint = true
}
```

> The following sections cover the various `Json` class configuration features.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

> ### Pretty printing

Reviewer: I do not think that placing this setting first is a great idea; its use cases are quite niche. I think we can still put it into 'Customize Json structure' even though it is not directly related.

Author: Although it might be ok to just place it in there after all. It feels like a choice of inflating its importance or slightly miscategorizing it. 🤔 Both feel undesired — perhaps placing it at the bottom would be my preference of these options. What do you think?

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Creates a custom Json format
val format = Json { prettyPrint = true }

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val language: String)

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", "Kotlin")

    // Prints the JSON output with line breaks and indentations
    println(format.encodeToString(data))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

This example prints the following result:

```text
{
    "name": "kotlinx.serialization",
    "language": "Kotlin"
}
```

> You can use the [`prettyPrintIndent`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/pretty-print-indent.html) option to customize the indentation used in pretty-printed JSON.
>
> For example, you can replace the default four spaces with any allowed whitespace characters, such as `\t` or `\n`.
>
{style="note"}

## Customize JSON structure

You can customize how a `Json` instance structures the encoded data.

> This allows you to control which values appear in the output and how specific types are represented.

Reviewer: Again, too much emphasis on encoding

import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Configures a Json instance to omit null values during serialization
val format = Json { explicitNulls = false }

@Serializable
data class Project(
    val name: String,
    val language: String,
    val version: String? = "1.2.2",
    val website: String?,
    val description: String? = null
)

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", "Kotlin", null, null, null)
    val json = format.encodeToString(data)

    // Omits version, website, and description properties from the JSON output
    println(json)
    // {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","language":"Kotlin"}

    // Treats missing nullable properties without defaults as null
    // Fills properties that have defaults with their default values
    println(format.decodeFromString<Project>(json))
    // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization, language=Kotlin, version=1.2.2, website=null, description=null)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> When `explicitNulls` is set to `false` encoding and decoding can become asymmetrical.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When `explicitNulls` is set to `false`, encoding and decoding can become asymmetrical.
```

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Configures a Json instance to encode maps with structured keys
val format = Json { allowStructuredMapKeys = true }

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val map = mapOf(
        Project("kotlinx.serialization") to "Serialization",
        Project("kotlinx.coroutines") to "Coroutines"
    )
    // Serializes the map with structured keys as a JSON array:
    // [key1, value1, key2, value2,...]
    println(format.encodeToString(map))
    // [{"name":"kotlinx.serialization"},"Serialization",{"name":"kotlinx.coroutines"},"Coroutines"]
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

### Encode special floating-point values

By default, special floating-point values like [`Double.NaN`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/latest/jvm/stdlib/kotlin/-double/-na-n.html)
and infinities aren't supported in JSON because the JSON specification prohibits them.

> To enable their encoding, set the [`allowSpecialFloatingPointValues`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/allow-special-floating-point-values.html) property to `true` in a `Json` instance:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable their encoding and decoding, set the [`allowSpecialFloatingPointValues`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/allow-special-floating-point-values.html) property to `true` in a `Json` instance:
```

> 
> When both specify a discriminator, `@JsonClassDiscriminator` takes priority over the one in the `Json` configuration.
>
{style="note"}

### Set class discriminator output mode

Use the [`JsonBuilder.classDiscriminatorMode`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/class-discriminator-mode.html) property to control how class discriminators are added to your JSON output.
By default, the [discriminator is only added for polymorphic types](#specify-class-discriminator-for-polymorphism), which is useful when working with [polymorphic class hierarchies](serialization-polymorphism.md).

To adjust this behavior, set the [`ClassDiscriminatorMode`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-class-discriminator-mode/) property to one of these options:

* [`POLYMORPHIC`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-class-discriminator-mode/-p-o-l-y-m-o-r-p-h-i-c/): (Default) Adds the class discriminator only for polymorphic types.

> * [`ALL_JSON_OBJECTS`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-class-discriminator-mode/-a-l-l_-j-s-o-n_-o-b-j-e-c-t-s/): Adds the class discriminator to all JSON objects, wherever possible.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* [`ALL_JSON_OBJECTS`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-class-discriminator-mode/-a-l-l_-j-s-o-n_-o-b-j-e-c-t-s/) adds the class discriminator to all JSON objects, wherever possible.
```

Here's an example with the `ClassDiscriminatorMode` property set to `NONE`:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Configures a Json instance to omit the class discriminator from the output
val format = Json { classDiscriminatorMode = ClassDiscriminatorMode.NONE }

@Serializable
sealed class Project {
    abstract val name: String
}

@Serializable
class OwnedProject(override val name: String, val owner: String) : Project()

fun main() {
    val data: Project = OwnedProject("kotlinx.coroutines", "kotlin")
    // Serializes without a discriminator
    println(format.encodeToString(data))
    // {"name":"kotlinx.coroutines","owner":"kotlin"}
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

> Without the discriminator, the Kotlin serialization library can't deserialize this output back into the appropriate type.
>
{style="note"}

### Pretty printing

By default, `Json` produces a compact, single-line output.

You can add indentations and line breaks for better readability by enabling pretty printing in the output.

> To do so, set the [`prettyPrint`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/pretty-print.html) property to `true` in a `Json` instance:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To do so, set the [`prettyPrint`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/pretty-print.html) property to `true` in the `Json` instance:
```

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Creates a custom Json format
val format = Json { prettyPrint = true }

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String, val language: String)

fun main() {
    val data = Project("kotlinx.serialization", "Kotlin")

    // Prints the JSON output with line breaks and indentations
    println(format.encodeToString(data))
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

This example prints the following result:

```text
{
    "name": "kotlinx.serialization",
    "language": "Kotlin"
}
```

> You can use the [`prettyPrintIndent`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/pretty-print-indent.html) option to customize the indentation used in pretty-printed JSON.
>
> For example, you can replace the default four spaces with any allowed whitespace characters, such as `\t` or `\n`.
>

> {style="note"}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{style="tip"}
```

### Ignore unknown keys

When working with JSON data from third-party services or other dynamic sources, new properties may be added to the JSON objects over time.

By default, unknown keys (the property names in the JSON input) result in an error during deserialization.
To prevent this, set the [`ignoreUnknownKeys`](https://kotlinlang.org/api/kotlinx.serialization/kotlinx-serialization-json/kotlinx.serialization.json/-json-builder/ignore-unknown-keys.html) property
to `true` in a `Json` instance:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
// Creates a Json instance to ignore unknown keys
val format = Json { ignoreUnknownKeys = true }

@Serializable
data class Project(val name: String)

fun main() {
    val data = format.decodeFromString<Project>("""
        {"name":"kotlinx.serialization","language":"Kotlin"}
    """)
    // The language key is ignored because it's not in the Project class
    println(data)
    // Project(name=kotlinx.serialization)
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true"}

#### Ignore unknown keys for specific classes

> <primary-label ref="experimental-general"/>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<primary-label ref="experimental-opt-in"/>
```

> > This feature is [Experimental](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained). To opt in, use the `@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)` annotation or the compiler option `-opt-in=kotlinx.serialization.ExperimentalSerializationApi`.

Author: good point, moved it there as a paragraph. 👍

>
{style="warning"}

Instead of [enabling `ignoreUnknownKeys` for all classes](#ignore-unknown-keys),

> you can ignore unknown keys only for specific classes by annotating them with the `@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys` annotation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
you can ignore unknown keys only for specific classes by using the `@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys` annotation.
```

This lets you keep strict deserialization by default while allowing leniency only where you need it.

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@Serializable
// Unknown properties in Outer are ignored during deserialization
@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys
data class Outer(val a: Int, val inner: Inner)

@Serializable
data class Inner(val x: String)

fun main() {
    val outer = Json.decodeFromString<Outer>(
        """{"a":1,"inner":{"x":"value"},"unknownKey":42}"""
    )
    println(outer)
    // Outer(a=1, inner=Inner(x=value))

    // Throws an exception
    // unknownKey inside inner is NOT ignored because Inner is not annotated
    println(
        Json.decodeFromString<Outer>(
            """{"a":1,"inner":{"x":"value","unknownKey":"unexpected"}}"""
        )
    )
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" min-compiler-version="2.2" validate="false"}

In this example, `Inner` throws a `SerializationException` for unknown keys because it isn't annotated with `@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys`.

### Coerce input values

> When working with JSON data from third-party services or other dynamic sources, the format can evolve over time.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When working with JSON data from third-party services or other dynamic sources, the format can evolve.
```

This lets you keep strict deserialization by default while allowing leniency only where you need it.

Here's an example:

```kotlin
// Imports declarations from the serialization library
import kotlinx.serialization.*
import kotlinx.serialization.json.*

//sampleStart
@OptIn(ExperimentalSerializationApi::class)
@Serializable
// Unknown properties in Outer are ignored during deserialization
@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys
data class Outer(val a: Int, val inner: Inner)

@Serializable
data class Inner(val x: String)

fun main() {
    val outer = Json.decodeFromString<Outer>(
        """{"a":1,"inner":{"x":"value"},"unknownKey":42}"""
    )
    println(outer)
    // Outer(a=1, inner=Inner(x=value))

    // Throws an exception
    // unknownKey inside inner is NOT ignored because Inner is not annotated
    println(
        Json.decodeFromString<Outer>(
            """{"a":1,"inner":{"x":"value","unknownKey":"unexpected"}}"""
        )
    )
}
//sampleEnd
```
{kotlin-runnable="true" min-compiler-version="2.2" validate="false"}

In this example, `Inner` throws a `SerializationException` for unknown keys because it isn't annotated with `@JsonIgnoreUnknownKeys`.

> ### Coerce input values

Author: sure thing 👍  — my only concern is it might be a bit more complex than the ones before — so perhaps it might be better as the second? What do you think? 🤔  (perh after `isLenient`)
